LingCh by Elod Csirmaz

LingCh is a DOS program for drawing tree diagrams.

1. The Editor

When editing, the tree is represented by a simplified chart: the lines
connecting the nodes are omitted and children (subordinated nodes) are
found to the right of the parent node. Siblings (coordinated nodes) are
under each other. For example, a tree represented in the editor as

        S       NP      Det
                        N
                VP      V

is, in reality

                S
             .    .
           .        .
         NP           VP
        .  .          .
       .    .         .
      Det    N        V

The cursor, which is a red line under the text of a node can be moved by
pressing the arrow keys. Up and Down keys move between siblings
(daughters of a parent node), while Left moves one level 'up' (to the
parent node) and Right moves 'down' to the first daughter. Keys (,) and (.)
(for historical reasons) are identical to Up and Down, respectively.

Under the tree, in yellow, brief mnemonic codes are shown for the various
functions of the program. For more about the functions, see the section
on the menu, below.

And lastly, in the bottom right corner, in white, the number of the current
node is printed. This code is needed _only_ for adding extra lines to the
diagram (see below).

2. The menu -- the functions

The functions can be reached either by pressing the key associated to them,
or by selecting the function from the menu. The menu can be invoked by
pressing either (?) or (ESC). One can leave the menu (return to the editor)
by pressing either key again. When the menu is active, the highlighted item
is green and under the mnemonic codes a little description appears of the
current function. Arrows move the highlight, (ENTER) selects the active
item.

The full list of the functions:
Mnemonic        Key     Description
code

?               (?)     Invokes the menu, and, with the short descriptions,
                        provides help. (ESC) is identical to (?).

arrows          arrows  This is not a real function, this element merely
                        informs the user that arrows can be used to move the 
                        cursor in the editor.

Edit            (e)     Modifies the text of a node. After pressing the
                        key, type the new text and then press (ENTER).
                        Pressing (ENTER) also invokes this function.

                        To get a node without text, that is, a node where
                        lines are simply connected, enter "|" as the text
                        of the node. For other signs with special meanings
                        in the text, see function Special Characters,
                        below.

Ins (Insert)    (i)     Inserts a node below the current node. The text of
                        the new node defaults to "___", which can be later
                        modified. The text of the first node is, by
                        default, "S".

Draw            (d)     Draws a nice version of the tree. After the program
                        has finished drawing, press any key to return to
                        the editor. One of the two ways of how you can insert
                        the diagram into a word processor is to run the
                        program under Windows, press PrintScreen button to
                        grab the screen (the system will copy it to the
                        clipboard) and then paste it into your document.
                        Clipping of the image might be necessary.

bMp (BMP)       (m)     Generates a BMP file containing the diagram. The
                        program will ask you for a filename (you can press
                        (ENTER) to use the default C:\WINDOWS\DESKTOP\OUT.BMP 
                        or any other key to give a custom filename) and then it
                        will write the picture out into that file. You can
                        easily insert this picture into any word processor.
                        In Word, magnifying the image to 200% will make the 
                        letters be approximately 12p large.

Quit            (q)     Quits the program.

Re (Restart)    (r)     Erases tree, sets everything back to default.

cuT             (t)     Cuts out a subtree including the current item.

tYe (tie)       (y)     Inserts the subtree cut out for the last time
                        under the current node. These two functions can be
                        used to reorder siblings or move large parts of the
                        tree. If you don't "tYe" a cut subtree, it will be
                        lost forever. (The program warns you before losing a
                        subtree.)

Alt (Alter)     (a)     Used to push a subtree down by one level. Press (a)
                        multiple times to push the subtree down by more
                        levels. Key (Shift)-(A) brings the subtree back.
                        This feature is useful if you want to arrange
                        terminal nodes (words of a sentence, for example)
                        in one line.

H (Horizontal)  (h)     The program can draw a horizontal line from the
                        first children of a node to the last one. Pressing
                        (h) selects or deselects this feature for the
                        current node. If the feature is selected, the text
                        of the node becomes light blue. This feature allows
                        you to draw triangles representing unanalysed
                        parts. (See line types for another way to draw a
                        triangle.)

alP (align Parent) (p)
                        The program can align a mother node
                        to be exactly above the selected child. By
                        pressing (p) when the appropriate child is 
                        active, this feature can be selected or deselected. 
                        When this feature is active, the text of the child 
                        node is printed in light purple.

Line            (l)     Changes the type of the line between the current node
                        and its parent. There are four line types: normal
                        line, no line, dashed line and triangle "line".
                        The text of the node is printed in bright white,
                        dark grey, normal white or yellow, according to
                        the line type.

Xlin (eXtra)    (x)     Adds custom lines to the diagram. You can define 8
                        extra lines at maximum, by giving the number of the
                        node they point from, the number of the node they
                        point to and the line type. Press buttons 1 to 8 to
                        modify the parameters of a given line. Follow the
                        instructions on-screen.

                        Line types are determined as follows: normal lines
                        are drawn from below the first node to the top of the
                        second node. Dashed lines are arranged in the same
                        way. 'To top' and 'to top dashed' lines are drawn from
                        the top of the first node to the top of the second
                        node. And finally, 'raise' lines are dashed, and they
                        form an L from the left or right side of the first
                        node to the bottom of the second node.

                        To insert raise-lines that do not start horizontally,
                        but first go down, then turn to the left or to the
                        right, and then go up, insert a node below the first
                        node with one of the first two special symbols as its
                        text; set its line type to dashed, and insert the
                        raise-line starting from this node.

Chr (Special Characters)
                (c)     Prints a list of so-called special characters. You
                        can use all the 256 ASCII characters when editing the
                        text of a node by pressing the Alt key, holding it,
                        typing the ASCII code of the desired character ON THE
                        KEYPAD (the 17 keys arranged in a rectangle on the
                        right part of the keyboard), and releasing the Alt key
                        afterwards. Some of these signs are substituted by
                        the program for special characters in order to make
                        the most important IPA symbols available. In the list,
                        the first column represents these substitutions.
                        Characters printed in white followed by their ASCII
                        codes are substituted for the purple signs next to
                        them. The white character will appear in the
                        editor, substitutions take place during the drawing
                        process only. The second column lists some ordinary
                        ASCII characters that can be inserted using the same
                        method.

                        Press (s) to suppress or enable the substitution. If
                        substitution is suppressed, all ASCII characters are
                        available for use in the tree (except for the first
                        two signs). Press (a) to get a table of all available 
                        ASCII characters, or press (ESC) to return to the
                        editor.

Box (textBox)   (b)     You can define at most 8 textboxes. These textboxes
                        contain a one-line string which is printed at a
                        given place before drawing the actual diagram. You
                        can use textboxes to include sentence number or the
                        translation of the analysed sentence, etc. Special
                        characters can be used. 
                        Coordinates are character, not pixel-based, that
                        is, adding one to the y coordinate will shift the
                        textbox down by one line. x=0 y=0 is the upper left
                        corner of the screen. Follow the instructions on
                        the screen to modify any of the textboxes, or press
                        (ESC) to return to the editor.

Vsp (custom Vertical space)
                (v)     Adjusts the space (measured in lines) between the
                        level containing the current node and the level
                        above it. The space is measured in a way that
                        setting it to 1 will leave no space between the two
                        levels. If you set this amount to 0, the default
                        space will be used. Adjusting the custom vertical
                        space of level 0 (the topmost) can shift the whole
                        tree down and is identical to the top margin (see
                        below). This feature is useful if you want to
                        include morpheme-by-morpheme translation under the
                        tree with no space above it.

Set (Settings)  (s)     Here, various global variables can be adjusted,
                        such as the default vertical space between
                        levels, the horizontal space between
                        neighbouring nodes, the left margin (useful if
                        you want to put a textbox to the left of the tree),
                        top margin (these numbers need not be integers,
                        fractions can be used); whether special-symbol-
                        substitution should be suppressed and finally, whether
                        the program should center parent nodes to the center
                        of the whole subtree below them, or to the center of
                        its immediate children. This latter method is the
                        usual way to draw linguistic tree diagrams.

File            (f)     File operations, here, you can save the tree into a
                        file for future use. Functions Save As and Open are
                        always possible to select, while Save can be
                        selected only if the program already knows which
                        file to write (that is, after loading or saving the
                        tree). Be careful not to overwrite an existing
                        file.

3. Invoking the program

Simply run LINGCH.EXE. LingCh will automatically try to load a tree
if the proper filename is given as its argument in the command line.

4. System requirements

LingCh is MS-DOS compatible. It requires VGA resolution (640x480x16).

5. Limitations

Maximum number of nodes: 60
Maximum number of children of one node: 10
Maximum number of levels: 20 (also restricted by the amount of memory
                             available)
Maximum number of textboxes: 8
Maximum number of additional lines: 8

